Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Lobs. And today I'm
joined by Doctor Jeff mcdonald. He's a professor in
the Department of Psychology at the University of Toronto
in Canada. And today we're focusing mostly on his
research on the psychology of singlehood. He's been working
on the intersection of single hood and sexuality and
he is also trying to understand what predicts well
being in single hood. And so we're going to
talk about those topics and some other related things
associated with the topic of single hood. So Dr
mcdonald, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to
have you on.
Uh Thanks for having me.
So let's perhaps start with the most basic question
here because maybe it would perhaps seem to be
an obvious one, but maybe it's not so obvious.
So, what is singlehood or at least how do
you define it in your research? And by the
way, do you approach it mostly as involuntary and
unwanted or as a voluntary phenomenon or both?
Yeah. So in terms of the definition of singlehood,
I mean, I wouldn't say it the, the field
of single hood studies is very young, you know,
like maybe five or 10 years or something like
that. And so, you know, I wouldn't say that
we've reached a consensus necessarily. Um But I would
say that, you know, probably the most important distinction
to be thinking about is that sometimes when people
talk about single people, what they mean are unmarried
people who could still be in a dating relationship
or something like that. Generally speaking in my lab,
we define single people as people who are not
in a committed romantic relationship. Um You know, in
terms of how we do that in our research,
we let people define that for themselves. I mean,
obviously there's some gray area there. I think the
kids like to talk about situationships now, for example,
you know, there's friends with benefits, there's that kind
of thing. And so there's definitely gray area between
being single and not being single. And so at
least for the time being, we just, when we
ask people to sign up for studies, you know,
do you define yourself as single? Um We do
typically in our research, uh ask people to only
sign up if they've been single for six months.
So that like some of that gray area has
worked itself out, maybe people think they're broken up
but it's not really broken up or whatever. Um
So yeah, I mean, I think it's perfectly valid
to be studying unmarried people. Typically we do it
as like people who are not in a committed
uh romantic relationship. I mean, in terms of, in
terms of voluntary or involuntary, I mean, like you
suggested in our lab, we very much want to
study it as both. Um I think that, you
know, like I said, because this is something that
hasn't been studied for very long. I don't think
we really know much about, you know, what's the
percentage of like voluntary versus involuntary when I talk
to people about my research, um you know, we
do a lot of descriptive research in my lab,
um which is we kinda just wanna see what's
going on. Uh And so I often use the
analogy of like, you know, in our lab, what
we're trying to do is we're trying to draw
a map. And so maybe if we do a
good job of drawing this map of where all
the single people are, we'll get a sense of
like, who are the happy, single people, who are
the less happy single people who's more voluntary versus
less voluntary. So I, I really try to approach
it as both and, and hopefully in, you know,
a few years, we'd be able to have better
data to say, you know, which is more common
and how common it is.
This is very interesting because uh I mean, you
started your answer by saying that many people tend
to think about single people or classify single people.
Uh All the ones that are unmarried. But of
course, there are people in committed romantic relationships that
are not married are just living together or even
not living together at all, but in a still
in a committed romantic relationship. But then even apart
from that, uh, I mean, there are people that
are in relationships but not really committed relationships, they
might just prefer casual relationships. They might just have,
I don't know, friends with benefits, they might have
just exclusively sexual relationships are what now people call,
as you mentioned, their situations are and I guess
that would also include people that in their social
media, in their relationship status would put something like
it's complicated or something like that.
Yeah. Yeah, I know, there's definitely a lot of
gray area there. And I mean, even as we're
talking, I'm thinking like, you know, there, there, there
would be, it would be really beneficial to have
like a, like a good qualitative study sometime where
we just go and ask people, you know, you
say you're single, like, what do you mean by
that? And we've done a little bit of that.
We've asked people like, what kind of romantic and
sexual stuff do you have going on? And so
we're starting to look into that. Uh So yeah,
I mean, let's, let's just say we're starting with
the easy question by trying to make it sort
of binary to start with. Uh But for sure,
for sure. And I, you know, I hear from
and read about a lot of people who feel
like they're somewhere in between those. So that's, that's
definitely a thing, you know.
But, but then, I mean, we have to keep
in mind but that it's not necessarily the case
that if someone is classified as single, they are
not in any kind of relationship at all, they
might be.
Yeah. Exactly. And in fact, we, we on that
front, we have done a little bit of research.
I'd be happy to talk about that, that we've
tried to get a sense of like, you know,
what do they have going on? But I will
say like, at least in the data that we've
got, um, the majority of people who tell us
that they're single have no sexual or dating relationships
going on. I do think that sometimes you get
this kind of like sex in the city image
of what single people's lives are like. And that's
great trauma, television and true for some people's lives.
Um, BUT for the majority of people, uh who
are single, they don't have something like that going
on. So it does happen and it's an important
part of the phenomenon. But I do feel like
culturally, we sometimes overestimate how much people are kind
of like casually dating or having these casual sexual
affairs. Yeah.
Right. And then related to that another question, there's
short term, single and long term single. So at
what point how much time does someone need to
be, uh, in a, uh, single for them to
be classified as long term single?
Yeah. You know, again, it's one of these things
where I wouldn't say that there's a field wide
definition of that. Um, SO, I mean, in terms
of like, the, the research that we've done, we've
used three years as a marker of long term
singlehood. Um, BUT I mean, you know, honestly we
just kind of made that up, right. Um And
so that's something else that like, again, I think
it would be really important to collect some data
and ask people, you know, when did you start
defining yourself as a long term, single person, you
know, anecdotally, I mean, one of the most interesting
things about doing this work is that there's so
many more people writing and talking about single hood
that there's no shortage of people's narratives about this
kind of thing. Um And anecdotally, it kind of
sounds like people just, it's like people have an
epiphany at some point, you know, that that's along
the lines of like, I guess this is it,
you know, and, and for some people that's, you
know, that they've been trying out dating for a
long time and they're like, but I'm never happy
in a relationship. So I guess that's not what
I wanna do, you know, other people are just
unsuccessful on the dating market and they're like, I
guess I'm gonna have to make peace with this.
And so there does seem to be something again
just anecdotally. This is not like hard data or
anything but like people themselves kind of come to
that conclusion at some point. And I think it
would be really interesting to study that more formally.
But yeah, I know that we don't really have
a formal definition. We've kind of used three years
as a, you know, as a one marker
but a and the reason at all for three
years or
no, you know, just vibes, I guess. Um Yeah.
No, I mean, you know, we just needed to
define it for a particular study. Um Yeah, I
mean, because that's the thing too, right is that
we don't even have a lot of good data
on like how people, how long people typically stay
single for, you know, like it's, it's one of
the challenges of this kind of work. And I
think it's why, for example, there's a lot more
research on marriage than there is on getting into
a relationship that like if you want to study
marriage, you get a bunch of people who are
already in romantic relationships and a pretty good chunk
of them are going to end up getting married
with single people. You need thousands of people. Like
we were in one study recently where I think
we had like 4000 people to start with. And
six months later, I think it was about 43
or 400 of them were in relationships. Um, SO,
um, you know, it's challenging, it's challenging to, to
get that kind of data. So we don't even
know, like, what is the typical length of single
hood for people who do end up in romantic
relationships? Yeah.
So let's get more specifically into the psychology or
what we know for, uh, for, at least for
now about the psychology of single people and their
psychological well being and some of the aspects of
some of their lifestyles, let's say. So when it
comes to their traits, do they have anything to
do with attachment with attachment style? Because I would
imagine that for someone that is uh at least
familiar with psychology, that would be one of the
first things that that would pop into mind that
maybe people who are single and the ones who
want to be single or like to be single.
Uh But they would possibly have some sort of
insecure attachment style, like a fearful and anxious attach
attachment style, some or an avoidant attachment style, something
like that.
Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's so, I mean, it's,
it's worth starting this answer by saying, um you
know, there are significant differences and it does look
like insecurely attached. People are more likely to be
single. I mean, having said that and this has
kind of been one of the thrust of the
work in my lab is that there's so much
variability among single people, right? So, you know, iii
I, I'll go down this road. I just don't
want to make it seem like there's no such
thing as a secure, single per person. There definitely
are, you know, there definitely are people who um
you know, they choose being single because they enjoy
it and they meet their social needs in ways
other than romantic relationships, for example. But I would
say that the data has suggested that insecure attachment
um is one factor that leads people to be
more likely to be single. So, um you know,
with, with insecurely attached or sorry, with anxiously attached
people. So, you know, these are the people that,
that in everyday language, you would talk about them
as like the more sort of like needy and
clingy types. They, you know, they tend to experience
a lot of a lot of negative emotion and
that leads them to feel like they need a
lot of support. Um You know, they tend to
feel like um they, uh uh you know, can't
really do life on their own, for example, they,
they really feel strongly in need of other people.
And so one of the places that they feel
strongly compelled to turn to, with that is to
romantic relationships. So anxiously attached, people really want to
be in romantic relationships. But one of the things
that's come out of our work that I think
is important to keep in mind is that anxious
attachment isn't just wanting a bit more closeness in
romantic contexts. They want to be closer to their
family, they wanna be closer to their friends. Like
it tends to be something that, like pervades all
of their relationships. But the trouble that anxiously attached
people have in romantic relationships and in other types
of relationships is that, you know, that neediness puts
a strain on the person that they're in a
relationship with because they tend to have these behaviors
when they get insecure, they, they feel like they're
gonna lose that person. And you know, what people
do when they feel like they're gonna lose something
is they try to lock it down, they try
to control it, right? And so this is where
you start to see like jealous kind of behavior
where you see like angry behavior or you see
controlling behavior. I mean, in general, you could say
that their goal is to try to limit the
other person's choice and autonomy in a way that,
you know, in the short term makes it more
likely that that other person is going to be
with them. And in the law, I mean, you
know, we all like to be in relationship with
people who give us choice and freedom and autonomy.
And so it just wears people down over time,
right? So, you know, with the anxiously attached people,
I think that the data do suggest they're more
likely to be single, it's not for a lack
of wanting a relationship. I mean, they of, of,
uh all of the different attachment styles want a
relationship the most. They just have these patterns that
make it challenging that for them to keep their
relationships together again, romantic and otherwise this is a
challenge across relationships. You know, I think it's with
anxious people. One of the things I find interesting
too is that when they're single they feel like,
oh, if I just had a relationship, I would,
you know, I would feel better. Right. But the
data from romantic relationships also shows that when anxiously
attached people get in a romantic relationship, they're also
less happy in romantic relationships. You know. So I
think that what anxious people on a healthy path
often do is they'll kind of notice that like,
oh, I thought a relationship would make me happy
and I'm kind of just not happy. Maybe I
should take singlehood as an opportunity to, like, learn
to live life with, you know, with on my
own, get solid on my own. Um, SO, you
know, in that sense, yeah, I mean, anxiously attached
people are more likely to be single. I do
think of singlehood as a real opportunity for anxiously
attached people to, you know, learn that they don't
need other people as much as they think they
do, um, with the avoidant people. So the avoidant
people, um, you know, these are the people who
in everyday life, they they tend to keep more
of an emotional distance from other people. Um, YOU
know, they, they don't value being close to people
all that much. They really like being independent. They
don't like people, you know, getting in their space
and taking up their autonomy. I mean, I always
joke for example that, like, you know, if, if
you and your partner come home with like eight
bags of groceries and you want to carry all
the groceries in by yourself, you might just be
anxiously attached. They, they don't like relying on other
people. It makes them feel like they're giving up
some of themselves, like they're giving up some of
their autonomy, right? So they like independence. They, they,
they're not particularly, you know, they're not high in
expressing themselves emotionally. Um And so they are also
less likely to be, uh, in romantic relationships. Uh
And again, it's not that there's no such thing
as avoiding people in a romantic relationship. There are
lots of them, but statistically they're more likely to
be single. Um And, you know, this is because
they do prefer emotional distance. There is an extent
to which, you know, I think that with avoiding
people in singlehood, they sort of get two things.
One is that they don't get other people, you
know, giving them a hard time and getting them
in their, in their face and they do like
to be alone, you know, and so I think
that they I think that they get those advantages.
But the thing with avoiding people is that just
like with anxious people, like, it's not just something
that affects the romantic relationships that this kind of
like more emotionally distant way of connecting with people.
And this kind of like de prioritization of relationships
with other people. It also affects their friendships and
their family relationships and that kind of thing. And
so, you know, what we find is that avoiding
people, they say that they like being single, they
like being single just as much as secure people
do, but they're less happy than secure people when
they're single. And, you know, our best guess is
that, um, you know, when you're not connecting romantically,
but you're also not connecting with your family and
your friends, you know, even if there's a part
of you that feels relieved, not being around other
people, um, just human beings get lonely, you know.
And so I think that what avoiding people do
is they kind of end up isolating themselves and
putting themselves in a situation where, you know, they
get a relief from what they think of as
the problems with social connection. But on those days
when they really want somebody, nobody's there for them,
you know.
But then, I mean, would it be fair to
say then that, uh whenever we know that someone
is single or even long term single, because that's
the, usually the cases that people tend to frown
more on and be more worried about. Uh WE
shouldn't assume necessarily that that person as sort of
insecure attachment style. I mean, they may be securely
attached, but for some reason or another that we
might get into here, they are just not that
interested in romantic relationships, for example.
Yeah, I mean, this is like, so again, like,
first of all, I think what you said is
really important is that uh again, there's all kinds
of reasons for being single. And I would say
that like, you know, statistically someone who's single is
more likely to have attachment insecurity, but that's not
the same as like everyone who is single is
single because they've got some kind of like personal
or emotional problem or something like that, right? Um
And there's also so there's that one layer, right?
Which is that it's, it's not necessarily the case
that people are doing it because of that kind
of an issue. The other thing is you'll, you'll
hear interesting narrative from more avoidant people that float
the idea and obviously people are free to agree
with this or disagree with this, right? But, you
know, the argument is often that, well, you think
that it's a problem that I'm not in a
romantic relationship. But actually, I think the problem is
that society overvalues uh romantic relationships, right? That they're
uh that I don't need relationships as much as
other people do. Um And you know, I would
say, for me, you know, I'm kind of so
so on that argument. But like I would say
the argument that I find the most compelling is
that, you know, there are other ways to live
meaningful lives and contribute to society, for example, than,
you know, having a relationship. And so I always
use the example of is I remember thinking about
this when uh the pandemic first started and the
rush was on to find a vaccine. Like that's
not a time for work life balance, right? Like
we actually need people in society who are, for
example, willing to devote themselves entirely to their job,
right? And I do think, you know, I come
from a background of romantic relationship researchers and I
think that we tend to judge people's value based
on how much they're interested in and good at
intimacy in relationships. And there's all kinds of other
things that we need people to be interested in
um and engaged in in life. And so that
is an argument that would hear from avoiding attached
people is that the problem isn't that I'm not
in a romantic relationship. The problem is you're not
realizing the ways that I get meaning and contribute
to society in ways other than connecting to people
emotionally.
Uh I mean, this is actually something that just
recently I talked with Doctor Bella de Polo on
the show because she's been also doing lots of
work on singlehood and she told me about different
ways that people who are single, uh, basically make
their lives meaningful by engaging socially in other ways,
by committing to their whatever work they're committed to
and sometimes even, uh, charity volunteer works, uh, stuff
like, I mean, many things that people might get
involved in that do not, uh, entail being in
a romantic relationship.
Yeah. Yeah. I totally agree with that. I totally
agree with that.
Uh, AND what about their well being? Uh I
mean, and again, connecting a little bit to attachment,
I guess that you've already touched a little bit
on that when in my first question about attachment.
But uh I mean, do single people usually have
uh high levels or low levels of well being?
And does that connect in any way to their
specific attachment style or not?
Right. Yeah. So, I mean, I think that the
data are pretty clear that if you look at
the average person in a relationship and you compare
them to the average person who is single and
again, this is single, defined as like not in
a committed relationship. I think that the, I think
the question of whether marriage brings happiness is a
different question than like does initially getting in a
romantic relationship bring happiness? And I think this question
about getting in a romantic relationship, the data are
more clear on that. So unequivocally, the data say
that people in romantic relationships are happier on average
than uh, people who are single. Um, AGAIN, you
know, it's not to say that everyone who's single
is miserable. And so, you know, there was a
study by Lisa Walsh, for example, and found that
there are absolutely single people who are just as
happy as the happiest people in relationships. You know,
there's less of them in Lisa's data. It was
something like there was 1/6 as many single people
in the top band as there was people in
relationships. But it's, you know, it's, it's a, it's
a common thing, right? Um But I mean, if
we're going to talk average differences, uh it's quite
clear. Um I think that the questions that are
um you know, harder to answer but are coming
into focus more is, well, why is that right?
Uh And so, you know, an average difference doesn't
necessarily mean that relationships are causing people to be
happier. Um And, you know, in our lab, for
example, we found evidence that one of the reasons
that there's differences between people who are single and
people in relationships is personality. Like there's certain types
of people who are more likely to get into
relationships. I mean, one of them we just talked
about and we'll come back to in a second
is attachment uh in our lab. My amazing grad
student, Elaine Hone has been looking at big five
personality variables and we find, for example, that extroverts
are more likely to be in romantic relationships. Um,
AND I mean, I think it, I think it
makes a lot of sense. Right. Like extroverts and
this is the thing, it's not that introverts enjoy
social contact less than extroverts. It's just that they
like less amount of it. Right. Like, avoidance, need
more time to themselves. And so in terms of
finding a romantic partner, I mean, this gives a
couple of advantages to extroverted people. One is that
they're probably just more motivated to have somebody around
all the time, right? And so they're more motivated
to be in a relationship, they also just tend
to be more social. And so there's more opportunities
for them to meet people. The thing about extroverted
people is that whether you're in a relationship or
not, they're just happier people on average, right? And
so we think that one of the reasons why
um partnered people are uh happier is that they
start out happier, right? And so that's part of
it, it's not relationships causing happiness. If anything, it's
like happiness causing relationships. But there's also been some
really good longitudinal studies like the, the way that
you really need to get at this is you
track people's level of well being before they get
in a relationship, you know, and then track it
again after they get in a relationship. Um And
again, it's been very hard to do, but it's
just in the last year really that there's a
bunch of studies that have been doing this. And
it is true when people go from being single
to being in a relationship, their levels of life
satisfaction go up. We have one study that we're
writing up in my lab right now where, you
know, we didn't just measure life satisfaction. We also
measured, for example, sexual satisfaction. And, you know, we
found that people's life satisfaction went up a small
degree when they got in a relationship, their sexual
satisfaction went way up when they got in a
relationship. Right? And so the way that we tend
to think about it is the more that a
domain of happiness is directly tied to being in
a relationship, like life satisfaction can come from your
relationship, but it can come from your work, it
can come from your hobbies. You know, sexual satisfaction
is much more directly tied to like, do you
have a romantic partner or not? Um, AND that
really seemed to strongly go up when people got
in a relationship. So, um, yeah, you know, I,
I think at this point it's very clear that
relationships increase people's happiness. I think that the really
important caveat to that, right? Is that in longitudinal
research, you don't randomly assign people to be in
a relationship, right? And so you can't say that
people who don't want to get in a relationship
would actually be happier if they did because they
haven't been in our studies. The people who didn't
want to be in a relationship, don't get in
a relationship, right. So, you know, I feel very
confident that for people who are motivated to get
into romantic relationships, their life satisfaction, their sexual satisfaction,
that kind of thing will go up. Um But
I can't, you know, I can't say that that's
gonna apply to everybody. So uh in terms of
uh the well being and its relationship to attachment,
um attachment has definitely uh in our data, proven
to be something that is uh linked to well
being and singlehood. So with anxiously attached people, and
you're right, we kind of, we kind of talked
about this a bit already, but like with anxiously
attached people, they just have more difficulty maintaining their
connections with people, whether that's friends or family or
whatever. Um And so, you know, they really, really
want to be in a relationship, they're having trouble
making it happen, they're having trouble having relationships stick
when they do happen. All of that neediness when
they're single is going to be directed towards other
people and those issues are going to come out
elsewhere, right? So, um that's really the struggle for
anxiously attached to people is wanting something that they
can't get. And, and again, ultimately, and this is
the thing, right? I mean, if people are listening
to this and they, you know, find like, oh,
I'm actually this like anxiously attached kind of person,
I mean, it is, it is definitely resolvable. There's
lots of good literature. There's like good therapeutic practices
that can help people with this. So it's not
a death sentence at all. And in fact, I
think that what anxious people will find is as
they do whatever they need to do to become
more comfortable with themselves. One of the things they'll
find is that desperation to be in a romantic
relationship will start to fade away. You know, like
that's my sense of like the healthiest singles, like
the singles who are high and secure attachment, who,
you know, they, um you know, have, uh they
don't worry about being rejected by other people. Like
anxious people. Do they trust other people, sort of
unlike avoidant attached people, they tend to have this
attitude of like, you know, what my life is
pretty good as a single person. If someone comes
along who can make it better, great. But if
nobody comes along, who can make it better, who
ma who can make it better? I'm already making
it better. Right. So, whereas the anxious people kind
of have this, like, desperation to be in a
relationship, secure people are kind of chilled about it.
And then that seems to be a associated with
more well being in singles. Um, YOU know, for
avoiding people. Yeah, they, they have of all of
these groups, the lowest desire for romantic partner. Um
And so they, they, I think, you know, they
find themselves when they're single. I think that they're
in a bit of a bind. It's almost like
they're like, look, I'm happy being single and I
don't want to change that, but I'm not super
happy overall. Like, what do I do about that?
And it is, you know, there's research with avoiding
attached people that suggests that they benefit from relationships
more than they realize. And so, you know, to
avoid people, I always suggest that they're the group
that might benefit from putting themselves in some uncomfortable
social situations. Like I always use the analogy that,
that for avoiding people, uh, intimacy is like exercise
where like, you know, often exercise feels bad in
the moment, but you actually feel better afterwards, right?
And so I think that's what often happens for
avoiding people is they feel uncomfortable when they start
to get close to somebody. Um, YOU know, they,
they don't fully trust people. They worry that they're
going to get taken advantage of like that kind
of stuff and yet something very human in them
just feels better because they've spent time with people,
you know. And so I think that's the trouble
that avoiding people have not just in singlehood, but
in relationships in general is that like, they just
kind of have this profile of pushing away something
that's good for them. You know,
I, I mean, what I'm about to say, please
correct me if I say anything wrong here. But
I would imagine that also for the anxiously attached
people, the ones that are desperately trying to get
into new relationships whenever they're single, they also might
get themselves into a bit of a, a messy
relationship situation because, I mean, it might just happen
that they come across someone that, uh, accepts to
get into a romantic relationship with them. But then
if they just are open to having a relationship
with almost anyone just to fill that void, let's
say, then they might get into relationships with people
that are not really very compatible with them. And
then it's even worse than just staying single for
a longer while. I guess
that's, I mean, you're exactly right. I mean, we
have, uh, there, there's some research that my former
phd student, Stephanie Spielman did. Uh, AND she's a
professor at Wayne State University now. And so she
did and continues to do a lot of work
on the fear of being single and we have
data on exactly this point, which is that, um,
you know, it was interesting because in this study,
when you just asked people, um, you know, basically,
like how high or low your standards, the, the,
the people were high in fear of being single,
which is strongly related to anxious attachment. They didn't
say my standards are lower. Right. So I'm not
sure that they consciously realize on a day to
day basis that their standards are lower. But then
we had other studies where we actually put them
in a situation where they could, they thought actually
meet somebody. Uh And then what we did is
we gave them dating profiles that we had written
ourselves. And so, for example, in one of the
studies, we purposely had one of the people they
could meet was not a very nice person. Um
So, you know, he was, you know, making it
clear, like I'm not gonna emotionally support you and
like, you know, exactly the kinds of things that,
that in relationship science were like, that's a bit
of a red flag, you know. Um But even
though they say that they're not interested in lowering
their, lowering their standards, they were more interested in
this person who is not a particularly nice person
than the people who are less in the fear
of being single. And it's we, you know, we
worry about exactly the process that you're talking about
is like, if you lower your standards like that
to just get in a relationship with anybody, I
mean, what is gonna provide a short term relief,
right? Like that sense of like being alone will
disappear in the short term. But if you keep
getting this feedback from your romantic partner that you're
not someone worth loving, it just reinforces those messages
that anxiously attach to people already believe. Um So
yeah, I mean, I think you're 100% right on
that.
A and by the way, talking about relationships uh
in your studies, in your research did you find
that reps experiences that people might have had in
uh, older relationships in past relationships might also influence
them being decided to remain single? And if so
are there aspects of how people function in romantic
relationships that perhaps would be useful to try to
understand, uh, single people and why they make the,
the, the relationship decisions that they make?
Yeah. I mean, I think it's a, I think
it's a great question and it's one of the
ones that, because singlehood studies is so young, we
really don't have good answers for at this point.
You know, there's one researcher Amy Rauer who has,
you know, published the first paper I've ever seen
kind of going in this direction. Um But I
wouldn't say that we know. Um YOU know, I,
I certainly, again, like just reading spaces where single
people talk about their lives, there's a lot of
narratives like this, right? Like, there's a lot of
people who feel like the relationships have just gone
so badly that they feel like they can't trust
people anymore or they don't get enough out of
relationships. Um So there's a lot of narratives like
that. Um But yeah, so, so people have those
kinds of stories, but it's very, again, it's very
tricky to do these kinds of studies if you
want to see, like, how do relationships uh events
actually affect people because then you've got to track
people and, you know, kind of hope that they
get into a big conflict or something like that.
Right. So that you can, like, follow them afterwards.
Um, AND certainly those kinds of studies tracking people
from a relationship to singlehood haven't been done. So,
you know, I, I think it's a great direction
for research to go in. I also think it's
understandable that hasn't been done yet because it's, uh,
kind of, uh, tricky. Um, BUT I will say,
I mean, one of the things and this comes
from the lab of uh my colleague, Ya Gourmet.
Um There is one type of person who finds
uh singlehood relatively satisfying and that's the kind of
person who likes avoiding social conflict. Um So she's
measured this like how, you know, how much do
you like avoiding conflict. Um And if you, if
that's really high on your priority list, you tend
to be about, you know, you, you tend to
be one of the happier groups of singles. And,
you know, it makes sense like getting into a
romantic relationship. I think oftentimes people only think about
it in terms of the benefits and they're obviously
in intimacy and sexual and all kinds of benefits
that people can get out of romantic relationships, but
you're not signing up for no conflict, you know.
So if that's something that's really important for you,
then maybe single hood is the better choice, you
know,
uh about that point. Let me just ask you,
I don't know. If you studied this specifically or
if your colleagues studied this specifically, but uh avoid
wanting to, or liking to avoid conflict. Does it
have anything to do with trade agreeableness or?
That's a good question, you know, I, I don't
have a database to answer to that. Um I,
you know, I don't know, I'm just gonna have
to take an, I don't know on that one.
That's a good question.
OK, no problem. So uh let me just ask
you just to close off the section about well-being.
Um APART from the factors that you mentioned, are
there any other, for example, interpersonal or interpersonal factors
that play a role in the well-being of single
people?
Yeah. So, I mean, you know, I feel like
I feel like with a lot of these, we've
kind of been like touching on them as we
go, right? But in terms of the uh and
so you're asking about the interpersonal,
yes, the intra and the inter
oh the intra and the inter. OK. Yeah. OK.
So in terms of like in terms of intra,
like, um you know, just basically factors that are
about the individual uh and how that predicts whether
they're happy being single or not. I mean, one
of them is having low desire for a romantic
partner. And I feel like this has been uh
i in a way it's very basic, but I
think it's been one of the important advances of
singlehood studies is that I would say there are
a number of spaces in society and even in
academia that just assumes that everybody wants a partner
that this isn't even a variable, that this is
a constant and everybody wants it and wants it
the same amount and it's absolutely not. It's, it's
a variable and it's a useful variable um for
predicting. So, yeah, people who have less desire for
a romantic partner are happier being single. It makes
sense if you don't want something and you don't
have it, you're not upset about not having it.
Um So there's that one, you know, another one
is gender and so this is uh some work
that we've published and some that we also have
in the works right now that on average, uh
women tend to be happier in single hood than
men do. Um Yeah. So, you know, and we
don't 100% know why that is. Um YOU know,
there's a, there's a few things that we tend
to think about. Uh YOU know, one of which
is that, that uh men are not as good
as women on average. Again, all kinds of like
overlap between the distributions. There's all kinds of like
highly social men out there. Um But on average
women are better at keeping their friendships together and
keeping their family relationships and um you know, I'll
talk about it in a minute. I mean, that's
another important factor with being a happy single person,
you know, women on average are lower in sexual
desire than men. And one of the big things
that happens when you get in a romantic relationship
is your frequency of sex goes up. And so
in a sense more there for, for men than
for women. Um YOU know, there's also a lot
of traditional roles that get played out in romantic
relationships where, you know, oftentimes women, for example, even
though they're working just as many hours as the
man is, are still expected to do like the
cooking and the cleaning and the childcare and stuff
like that. And so, you know, structurally, there is
arguably more for men to gain by getting into
a relationship. And so, um you know, gender is
one that we started to think about um in
terms of like interpersonal things and, and again, this
is one that we've touched on a number of
times is um having other social relationships in your
life. So having, you know, family and friend relationships,
having good social support that might come from your
friends or a therapist or something like that. Um
I mean, the way that I tend to think
about it is, um you know, I think it,
I think a useful way to think about happiness
since in singlehood versus relationships is to think about
like what are all of the things that you
get out of being in a romantic relationship and
the more of those things that you can get
being single, the less motivation there is to get
into a relationship. Like it's absolutely my frame of
thinking in all of this is that generally speaking,
people are making rational decisions based on the conditions
that are in front of them. Right? And so
if you're getting your social support needs met by
your friend and friends and family, there's like one
less reason for you to get into a romantic
relationship if you're getting your social support needs met.
Um You know, one thing that again comes out
of you a gourmet's lab that looks like is
useful for predicting whether people are happy being single
is not just being socially integrated, but having more
single people in your social network. And so you
definitely will get these narratives from single people where,
you know, they start to feel excluded from the
couples nights, for example, right? Or even just the
implicit pressure of like when everyone else is in
a couple, like maybe I should be in a
couple too. So I think that single people find
it validating and useful for a connection. Um You
know, because I mean, that's the other thing too,
right? Is I think that I think that sometimes
couples get a bad rap for like excluding single
people, but similarity is just something that happens in
people's friendships, like people like hanging out with other
people, like them, right? Um And it's definitely not
unheard of for single people to exclude people in
relationships. You know, I've heard of, you know, lots
of like party nights where the people in relationships
are not invited, for example. Right. Um, SO anyways
having more single people that comes out of, you
think's work is, is, uh, is something that's helpful.
Um, AND I guess the last thing I'll talk
about here is, is sexual satisfaction. And so, you
know, again, as I was saying, like you make
that list of things that you get in a
romantic relationship, um that, you know, if you're getting
in it, when you're single, it would take the
edge off of wanting to be in a relationship.
And you know, what we found is that um
like friend and family relationships are great, but people
that's not where people obviously go to get their
sexual needs met, right? And so even when people
have really good social support and emotional support networks,
they often still feel like there's that one thing
that's missing and in our data, it's, that's one
thing that gives them a bit of an itch
to be in a romantic relationship. But, you know,
as we talked about before, I mean, some people
have these casual sexual relationships or, you know, they're
meeting their sexual needs in other ways. It is
a little bit funny on that front though because
we found this in a couple of our data
sets that if you ask the people who are
happy with their sex lives as single people. Um,
YOU know, are you interested in being in a
romantic relationship or not? On average? They're more likely
to say like, no, I'm not interested. You check
back in with them six months or a year
later and they're actually more likely to be in
a romantic relationship. And so what, you know, my
best guess with that, this is uh some work
that I did with a former student of mine
who's now a professor at University of Western Ontario,
Samantha Jewel. We did something called the progression bias.
And the idea there is that, you know, the
simplest way to put it is that people catch
feelings, like, even when they think that they're in
something casual, like it's just kind of the way
that the human heart works. Like it's not like
it's not like, you know, you go to the
department store and buy a TV, you don't develop
an attachment to the TV. And so if you
need to take it back, it's like, really not
that big of a deal, right? But we develop
care for the people that we, you know, are
even in casual relationships, obviously individual differences on that
front. Um But these casual relationships start to become
a little bit sticky and, you know, all of
a sudden you find you miss them after a
couple of days and, you know, all of a
sudden it's like, well, I'm over there two nights
a week anyways I might as well leave some
clothes and then, like, you know, next thing it's
like I'm here every night. Why don't I just
move in? Like, why don't we just make this
a thing? Right. So, yeah, sexual satisfaction is an
interesting one. And that sexually satisfied singles, um, they're
happier as singles but they're sort of like as
it were at risk of getting into a committed
relationship.
So, you, you've, you've ended up mentioning or touching
on a, on a bit there that, uh, I
had perhaps saved for another question, but since you've
already mentioned it, let me ask you then directly,
uh, I mean, then when it comes to perhaps
trying to understand whether individuals report a preference for
staying single, might have really completely closed off the
possibility of getting romantically involved with anyone or if,
for example, someone just comes along that they think
might make for a good partner they can, or
they might fall in love with them. Then the
second possibility is usually the correct one. I mean,
or is the most likely?
Yeah. I mean, you know, it, it touches on
something I've been thinking about a lot lately, which
is that, um, you know, a lot of the
people in the single who studies, uh, uh, sort
of domain, uh, I think I've been talking about,
like, you know, there's definitely a growing group of
people who identifies people who don't want to be
in a relationship. Uh, BUT I've been really thinking
lately about how, like, one way to put it
simply is, it's like there's two camps in all
of that. Right. And so, like, one of these
camps and this shows up in our, in our
sexual satisfaction data is that, I mean, in essence,
there's two different ways for singles to be sexually
satisfied. And so one of them is, uh, the
group of singles that has relatively low sexual desire.
And so, like, low sexual, higher in singlehood is
associated with higher well being. I mean, I love
talking about that finding because I think in most,
at least western societies, if you say that you
have low desire, that's supposed to be a problem,
that's not a good thing. But in, in terms
of single people, it's associated with being happier. And
again, like, I mean, why not? If there's something
you don't want that you're not getting, it's not
a problem, right. So I think that there's kind
of this one camp that, like, you know, we
could call the door closed camp as it were.
And so these are the people who have really,
you know, low desire for a partner. Uh, THESE
are people who have, um, you know, low sexual
desire in that camp. Some of those people are
gonna be the people who identify as a romantic
or as sexual, who have never felt this, you
know, I think there's gonna be other people in
there, uh, who have felt it before but don't
feel it now. Um, SO, yeah, let's call those,
the door closed people as it were. Um, AND
in many ways they have, they have relatively positive
outcomes in terms of single hood. But then there
is this other group who, the reason they say
that they don't want a relationship. My sense is,
is because they're getting everything that they would have
gotten from a relationship, but they get it with
the additional autonomy and freedom that comes with being
single, right? And I, you know, I always think
about this is like, this is at the heart
of the trade off between being single and being
in a relationship and you'll hear this from most
single people you talk to if you ask them
like, what is the best thing about being single?
I, I have all of the freedom I want,
you know, if I, if I don't want to
wash the dishes tonight, no one's gonna give me
if I want to eat ice cream for dinner,
like no one's gonna give me a hard time
for that, you know. Uh And so in a
way, like these are the people who are able
to get like the sexual and emotional needs met.
Um And also maintain that autonomy and freedom. And
so I think that they're a bit of a
different set of the people who are not interested
in romantic relationships. It doesn't come from a place
of like low desire, it's like desire that's getting
satisfied, you know. But again, I mean, our data,
it, it looks like these are people who are
unbeknownst to the, to them, many of them are
on their way to a committed relationship.
Uh It's interesting that you mentioned, there are people
with low sex drives because it's not only the
fact, as you mentioned that many times, people, particularly
even more so in western societies tend to think
that someone with a low sex drive must have
some kind of problem, even sometimes a physiological problem
or something like that. But I would also be
willing to bet that many of the people who
go to their doctors and report a low sex
strive as a problem would also be the ones
who are, who are in a romantic relationship. But
the thing there is that they are not matching
the sex drive of their partners.
Yeah. Exactly. Yeah, exactly. It's, I mean, it's, it's
really all relative and it's not about sex drive
and isolation. It's about sex drive relative to people's
other goals, like connect with their husband or wife
or going from single to being in a romantic
relationship or something like that, you know.
So let me ask you now another question at
this point. Do we have any idea at all
about how many people out there actually prefer to
remain single and do not want any romantic relationships
at all, I mean, do we have any good
data on that?
We really don't. Yeah, we really don't. Um And,
and you know, I mean, I think that we
don't even have the right conceptualizations for it. Yeah,
because um you know, even when we were talking
before about, you know, are you voluntarily single? Like
this is, this is the way this question often
gets framed is, are people voluntarily single or not?
But even voluntarily single can mean different things like
voluntarily single can mean no matter who you present
to me is a potential dating option. I don't
want to date anybody, but it could also mean
and this is the narrative. I feel like I
hear more often is given the choices to date
in my community. I'm not interested in dating any
of those people, right? Um So I, I don't
think we even have fully have the conceptualization yet.
I mean, you know, my sense of the data
is that um you know, the average person has
some desire for romantic relationship. I do think that
romantic desire and sexual desire is pretty normative. Um
But there are also large percentages of people. Uh
uh And especially this is the thing is I
think that in research, sometimes we talk about it
in terms of percentages, but you don't need a
very high percentage to be talking about millions of
people in the world's population, right? So there's definitely
significant numbers of people uh who are not interested
in romantic connection. I guess the other thing I
would say about all that too is that I
think that that uh we've kind of implicitly been
talking about it this way. And I think people
often do is if this is a trait, you
know, but within each person, like people often go
through phases of like dating is the last thing
that I want or dating is the top priority
on my list. And so, um I think that
in addition to asking the question of like, um
you know, what percentage of people currently have no
desire, um you know, asking questions like what percentage
of people at some point in their adult life
have no desire or what percentage of a person's
life do they spend desiring versus not desiring a
relationship? And sometimes that period of not desiring a
relationship is after you're married, for example, right? So
um it's a, it's complicated. So, yeah, no, I
mean, that's a long way to say like, no,
again, I'm gonna take it, we don't know on
this one
and of course, we're talking mostly about single people
here. But uh why, what are the main reasons
why people want romantic relationships? I guess that you've
already ended up uh touching on some of these,
particularly when earlier I asked you about interpersonal aspects
of singlehood. But uh tell us more about it.
What are the main reasons?
Yeah. So, I mean, I feel like this question
is like, you know, to the extent that there's
a number of things that are being contested in
the single hood studies space. I mean, I would
say that this is one of the big ones,
right? Um And so I think that the field
that I come from romantic relationship research in a
lot of ways, you know, it's a very psychology
focused, it's a very individual focused kind of discipline.
And, you know, we think a lot about, for
example, the evolutionary underpinnings of romantic and sexual desire.
Um And there are some very good arguments to
be made there. I mean, we are a pair
bonding species. It doesn't mean that everyone pair bonds
and it doesn't mean that when you pair bond,
it's guaranteed to stick for life. But compared to
other species, I mean, we are a pair bonding
species and there's some good arguments as to why
that is, there's also some really good arguments as
to why sexual desire should be common. I think
there's a good argument that we as a species
would not be here if we didn't have sexual
desires, a relatively high priority for a lot of
people, right? Um And so I think that psychology
has tended to focus largely on these kinds of
like innate evolutionarily driven processes as explaining why it
is that we pair bond and have romantic desire.
But I would say that what the evolutionary perspective
is and in psychology in general has done a
poor job of is taking a more sociological perspective
and thinking about, you know, what are the social
structures that people are surrounded by, that encourage particular
normative life paths, right? Um And so it is
true in an awful lot of societies, it is
considered the morally correct thing to do to, you
know, for example, carry on the family line to,
um you know, marriage has been used as a
political tool, for example, uh that's been, you know,
not so much about romantic desire, but has been
more about, you know, using that structure of pair
bonding for the like political kinds of purposes, right?
Um And I would say that it's, I mean,
to me, it's one of the most fun things
about working in singlehood studies is there's a lot
of disciplines talk about being interdisciplinary, but like you
can't get away from it here. You know, I
mean, having said that I would say that the
sociological side of things often hasn't been really exposed
to the evolutionary arguments, right? And so I think
that, like, we need to work on integrating those
two because from my perspective, it's just kind of
obvious that it has to be both, right? Like
there's these bottom up things where people around the
world experience romantic love, like that is absolutely a
thing. And the ubiquitous ubiquitousness of that culturally, I
think is one of the points in favor of
the idea that this is an evolved phenomenon, right?
Um But at the same time, like if you
look at how relationships have changed across history, right?
The kind of structures, I mean, all you have
to do is travel to a different culture and
see like dating norms, for example, like in the
west, there's this thing where people date for years
and try out different people before they ever get
married. There's other cultures where you don't date, you
just like you, you know, you and your family
pick somebody and you get married for example, right?
So I think it's both and I think that
that's going to be one of the challenges for
single hood studies is like we, we need to
not be on one team or the other, right?
Like we need to realize like both of these
are reasons why um there is both social pressure
to get married and there intrinsic sorry, there's social
pressure to be in romantic relationships, an intrinsic desire
to be in romantic relationships for a lot of
people. It's really interesting how those interplay with each
other. And I think that's what the field is
going to need to wrestle with in the in
the near future.
Yeah, I I mean a few years ago I
have on the show, Doctor Helen Fisher and the
data she has about how we we we ubiquitous
romantic relationships and romantic love is across different even
cultures and also the commonality of, um, symptoms of
romantic love across cultures. I mean, it is very
compelling but even she herself says that even from
an evolutionary perspective, we shouldn't expect it to last
very long or even to last for a lifetime,
at least with the same person. And also, of
course, that data doesn't tell us anything about whether
it applies to every single person out there or
even the percent the job people with the place.
Yeah. And I mean, that is, I mean, I
think the, I mean, there's a lot of good
points to unpack in there. But like, you know,
the one that I'll go on is just, I
would say, I would say neither the sociological perspective
nor the evolutionary psychology perspective does a very good
job of dealing with individual differences. And there are
so many individual differences in this, there's so many
different types of people. Um Yeah. So, so it's
a, it's a broad landscape as it were.
Yeah. So let me ask you now, another type
of question. So do people who fear being single?
And again, this might include at least some of
the young usually attached people have a more difficult
time letting go of ex-partners following a romantic breakup.
Yeah, that's something that uh definitely flashed in my
mind when we're, when we were talking about the
challenges of anxiously attached people is that um you
know, there are different types of bad relationships and
arguably one of the bad types of relationships is
not being able to let go of your ex
partner. Um, SO it is definitely something that they
have trouble with. I mean, I will say that
there's kind of like a, you know, there's a
cultural trope that, like, sticking around your ex and
like having sex with your ex, for example, makes
it hard to let go. There has been some
research that's challenged that and suggests that, like, it
might not be as bad as people think so,
you know. Yeah, I do, I do want to
put that as a caveat that, that some researchers
would argue that we've overstated the, the problem with
that. Um I don't know, I mean, I come
from an attachment background and I do think that
um to kind of put it in simple terms
that you can't make space for somebody new until
you kind of like kick out the old person,
you know. So I do know that there's something
to be said for like adequately grieving an old
relationship, letting that person go and making space for
somebody new. But this is the trick for anxiously
attached to people is that they so strongly feel
like they need somebody that it's hard for them
to let go of that person. They they for
them. It's kind of like, you know, like, like
being on the sinking of the Titanic and just
letting that door go and floating, right? Like they
just feel like kind of terrified by that prospect.
Um, I mean, we have done some research where
if you do things like reassure anxious people that
they will meet somebody new soon, then it becomes
more possible for them to let go of that
old person. And this is, you know, when I
talk to my students about this, I think that
one of the mindsets that you can get in
when you get stuck on someone romantically who was
an ex partner is you convince yourself the reason
that you're stuck on them is that they have
some special irreplaceable quality. And like, even if someone
else came along, like I wouldn't want them. It's
just my act like they have this halo around
and they're amazing. But we did studies where, you
know, we gave anxious people reason to think that
they would find somebody new soon. And all of
a sudden this ex partner who is so special
and irreplaceable. As soon as you tell them that
someone else is gonna be coming, they let go
of that old person, right? And so I think
that like it, it feels like you're hung up
on that person because they're special. And what is
actually happening a lot of the time is you're
hung up on them because you feel like you
need somebody, you know. And so that's, that's the
advice I always give to people who are having
trouble letting go of an A is like, instead
of ruminating on how special and amazing that A
is ruminate on that feeling that you need somebody,
let yourself sit with that. And like that's kind
of the starting point for letting people go. That's
just something that's harder for anxious people to do.
But then on the other hand, I guess that
there are also situations and this is one of
the things that really makes romantic relationships complex and
interesting. There's also situations where it's the fact that
people never really let go of the other person
that they eventually come back together and are happy
again. I mean, there's also that sometimes
I, you know, it is true. Um I'm, I'm
blind. There's a, there's a name for that. There's
been research on that. Um, LET'S call them, it's
not the right name. Let's call them back and
forth relationships. It does happen these like romantic coming.
It's the stuff of Hollywood movies. There has to
be like a challenge that breaks people up and
then brings them back together again. In the long
term. Those relationships tend to be less stable. So,
uh it is, it is a romantic story but
I mean, it's not that surprising relationships that break
up once are more likely to break up again
in the future, right? So it works out sometimes
again, like, you know, life comes in all flavors.
But, um I, you know, given a choice, I
would, I would pick slow and steady, you know,
Yeah, fair enough. So, uh, let me ask you
now more directly. What do singles value in their
lives? Again, we've already touched a little bit on
this. But what are some of the things that
they consider to be necessities and daughters that they
consider to be luxuries?
Yeah. So we've, we've, uh, we did some research
on this specifically. Uh, I, I really like this
study because we was cross cultural. We asked both
Western and Korean singles and the answers were relatively
similar. You know, when you ask them, like, what
are the absolute fundamentals um to a happy single
life, the things that they say are um their
uh mental health, their physical health and their family.
So like those are the three foundations they describe
as absolute necessities, you know, somewhere in the middle,
they tend to uh nominate things like, uh you
know, their work life, uh their leisure life, um
you know, that sort of thing, their friends. Um
And we thought it was really interesting in doing
that research that the absolute lowest priority for them.
Um OR, you know, the better way to put
that is the luxury. Like once I've got my
family and friends, uh once I've got my mental
health set, then I start to get interested in
romance and dating, right? Um And you know, a
lot of single people, I think rightly get frustrated
that when people think about single people, the first
thing that they think about is romance and sex.
Like these must be people who are thinking about
romance and sex all the time. Uh, AND you
know, what you'll often hear from single people is
they'll say, like, look, I don't want to be
defined by my relationship status. And I often joke
that for me as a researcher, it's really frustrating
because literally what defines you is your relationship status
if we're defining single versus partnered people. But what
they mean by that, what I take from that
is that, you know, single lives in most ways
are not that different from partnered lives, the kind
of things that they're occupied by that, they think
about, you know, maintaining a good relationship with their
family, you know, maintaining their physical health, that that's
like a foundation that they want to build on.
Um YOU know, kind of the next level is
getting your like career and financial situation in place,
right? Um And then that's the kind of foundation,
you know, like, for example, if you, if you're
the kind of person who's thinking about having kids,
you don't have kids and then figure out your
job, right? Like it goes in the opposite direction.
And this is why a lot of people are
talking about like the struggles of the current generation
where, you know, employment tends to be more unstable.
It's harder to buy a house, for example, like
it's harder to set yourself up with like a
stable foundation. And so I think people sometimes are
like, oh, you know, these, these crazy kids not
wanting love and stuff like that and it's like,
look, when you take the foundation for relationships out
from underneath society, like people are going to be
rational and are gonna be like, look, it's, it's
too uncertain for me to plan for the future.
And so why would I be thinking about dating
and sex when I haven't even gotten my, like,
job and my career set? Right. Um So, you
know, that, that's, that's just it, I think that,
I think that for, for single people, uh their
lives in, in that sense are like very mundane
and like everybody else's life that they have very
normal things that occupy them on a day to
day basis. And probably in a lot of cases,
very much the same kinds of things that are
occupying people in relationships. But, yeah, once they get
that set that our data suggests only then if
they're interested in dating and sex, do they start
to make that a priority?
Mhm. And I would bet that that bit about
having certain aspects of your life stable before getting
into a relationship or even, uh more drastically into
marriage and having kids, uh, would be cross-cultural, more
or less the same, at least to some extent
because for example, I'm very interested in Japan, Japanese
culture and, and history. And, uh I know that
back in the late eighties when they had a
big financial crisis that really ST destabilized the system
and they were used to getting out of, uh,
to finishing college and getting a corporate job that
would last for their life. I mean, they would
never be fired or anything like that. It would
be a stable there. That's the kind of culture
they used to have there. It, but it was
immediately after that, that rates of single would really
rose and rates of marriage really started limiting. So
that's another example. I guess there
is a, there is a fantastic paper on exactly
what you're talking about by Akiko Yoshida. Uh WHO
I'm, I'm just such a fan of her work
and she's, that is exactly her narrative is that,
you know, that one of the points that she
makes and there's a number of single hood researchers
that are not from the West who make this
point is that in the West, we tend to
be kind of obsessed with autonomy and we assume
that people do things because they choose it, right?
Because that, that, that's what Western culture is largely
about. And they make the point that like that's
really leaked into singlehood studies. And so a lot
of the discourse and singlehood studies about, oh, well,
more people are single. It must be because people
are choosing to be single, right? Um And Akiko's
point and the, and the point of, of other
researchers and she makes this case specifically in Japan
is exactly what you're talking about is that with
that solid foundation pulled away from people now, I
mean, not only do they not have this like,
stable economic foundation to build on, but they don't
even know what the norms are anymore. Like, it
used to be a very clear path to check
certain boxes to get to a certain end state
and people are kind of left with like, what
are we supposed to do now? So she makes
the argument that in Japan. Um AND I think
that I think this argument generalizes to some other
places as well. That one of the problems is
that the old norms are still there even though
the system has changed. And so, you know, she
uses as an example of that. Um THERE used
to be a huge imbalance between how much money
women were making and men were making. And there's
still a gap, a lot more women have entered
the Japanese workforce. But she argues one of the
things that happened is that there's still that norm
of I'm supposed to date somebody who makes more
money than me. But as women's salaries have gone
up, there's not as many men who make more
money than the women, right? Same thing with the
like, men are still expecting women to do all
the housework even though so many Japanese women have
entered the workforce, right? So there's these old norms
that don't work well for the new situation. So,
um yeah. No, I think that's an interesting case.
I will say apropos of nothing. I was actually
in Japan last month. I'm a big fan of
Sumo wrestling. Uh AND we had the opportunity to,
to go to the arena and see some Sumo
and it was fantastic. Great,
great. So let me ask you now. So the
satisfaction with being single change with age, I mean,
is it that, for example, older people tend, it
tends to be easier for them to be satisfied
with being single than for younger people or not?
Yeah, that's what our, that's what our data look
like. It like. It looks like there's an inflection
point at about age 40 where people's satisfaction with
singlehood starts to go up. Um I think a
big part of that is that data in general
suggests that at about midlife, people start to become
happier with their life. Um You know, I I
there's, there's um you know, things like socio emotional
selectivity theory that argue that like as you get
older, you stop thinking so far in the future
and you just start enjoying what you have now
in the short term, right? And so that's part
of it is people just kind of structurally enjoy
their lives more. Um And part of the reason
I think that this isn't just about single people
is that there's also uh there was a good
paper by Janina Buehler showing that exactly the same
is true. People in relationships that after about age
40 if you're in a relationship, you're happier about
being in a relationship. If you're single, you're happier
about being single. So, I think a chunk of
that is just people get happy with full stop.
I mean, I think what's important in a single
book case is that, I think a lot of
people would assume that older singles are unhappy. And
so maybe if there's a group that it wouldn't
apply to would be single people, that doesn't seem
to be the case. I mean, I do think
there are probably some relationship status specific parts to
this that um you know, by the time you
get to 40 I think that you've got a
pretty good sense of, are you a relationship person
or are you a single person if you want
to be in a relationship, you've had a decent
amount of time to get yourself in a relationship.
You know. So I think part of it is
selection is that by the time you get to
midlife you're kind of in the place that you
want to be. There is a little bit of
data and see this is where it's, it's challenging
because once you get up to like 70 plus
the number of participants, it's a little macabre but
start to drop off, right. And so like it's
harder to get big samples in those older ages.
There's a little bit of data that suggests to
me possibly that satisfaction with singlehood might start to
level off at the point when people are starting,
uh you know, to develop more health issues and
like getting closer to end of life, that kind
of thing. So to me, that's still a bit
of an open question, but certainly in that period,
from like 40 to like 70 people just seem
to get happier and happier with being in whichever
relationship status they're in.
And I would imagine that there's also that subset
of older people that, uh, very, unfortunately, even though
they were for, in committed relationships for a very,
very, very long time, eventually their spouse dies and
then in their older age they have to adapt
to perhaps being single for, uh, sometimes for the
rest of their lives.
Right. Yeah. Absolutely. Absolutely. And, and, you know, I
mean, the research definitely shows that, that divorce and
widowhood, I mean, they, they do take a toll
on people, you know, obviously it does undermine people's
well being. Um, AND it's a real challenge. I
mean, having said that, I mean, there's two points
that I always think about one is that, I
mean, people are incredibly adaptable, you know. Um, AND
so this is the thing I think that even
talking about, like, single, you know, are you a
single person or are you a relationship person? I
think most people are capable of managing life either
way and we're very good, you know, what, what
people call, what research call secondary coping of making
the best of our situation, you know. Um And
so I think that people are good at adapting.
The other thing about widowhood is that, you know,
I don't think this is clear in the data
yet, but one of the arguments is that one
of the reasons why singlehood can be problematic, I
would bet Bella talked about this a bit is
the social norms around being single, right? Um And
one of the things that happens as you get
older and people start to pass away is that
because there are a number of widows, it is
more and more normal to be single. And so
I think in that sense, right? There's more people
to spend time with, there's more people to commiserate
with. So, you know, I I'm certainly not trying
to argue that widowhood is easy, you know, but
I do have a lot of faith in people's
adaptability and, and the social structure of people's social
lives is, is different when they get up to
that age, you know.
So earlier, I asked you if we have any
idea about the number of people that uh like
being single or want to be single. But do
we know if singlehood is on the rise? Because
this is something that some people worry a lot
about that. Sometimes they point to statistics that say
exactly that even more. So they look into statistics
coming from younger people and they look at, uh,
sexless and them not being partnered with other people.
So is single hood on the rise or?
That's, I mean, my sense is that, that's the
clear consensus in the data. Um I think that
the, the, the, you know, if you look at,
uh, figures like, um, you know, when do people
get married if they get married at all, if
they divorce, do they get remarried? Um, YOU know,
the big one that I've seen a lot of
is the percentage of people living alone. Um, AND,
you know, living alone is not the same as
having a romantic partner, is not having a romantic
partner, but they're correlated. And so I think all
of the indicators suggest that worldwide and that, that
is the thing that's really interesting to me is
that I think that psychology in particular has gotten
into a lot of trouble by like, collecting data
in America and then being like, oh, worldwide phenomenon,
right? But this is legitimately a worldwide phenomenon from
what I can tell. And so that makes it
interesting, I would say, like, kind of like you're
pointing to the big debate isn't, is single hood
on the rise. The big debate is, is this,
is this a good thing or a bad thing?
Right. And, and I, I mean, do you have
any opinion on that? Is, is it mostly a
group or mostly a bad thing.
You know, I don't think, you know, I don't
think that we know well enough yet, you know,
I don't think that we have enough data. Um,
YOU know, II, I certainly recognize the argument that
there are probably people throughout at least recent history
who would have been happier without a romantic relationship.
And again, I mean, I think this is where
individual differences come in. Right. That I think that,
you know, to the extent that romantic relationships have
been more in men's favor than women's favor, for
example, and women haven't always had the political power
to make choices for themselves. I think there's an
argument to me made that for women in particular,
this has the potential to be a good thing.
You know, that, that if those increasing numbers of
singlehood, for example, didn't mean people never getting partnered,
but people being more having more opportunity to choose
whether they get in a relationship and with whom
they get in a relationship, like that's probably a
good thing. Um You know, I do come from
a romantic relationship research background and also just the
data that I've seen. Again, it makes it clear
to me that for the average person, um they're
happier being partnered than not being partnered. And I
do think that romantic relationships bring a lot of
benefits that um sexual satisfaction among partnered versus single
people. It is an enormous difference like the effect
size on that difference is enormous. And so people
are considerably more sexually gratified in romantic relationships, people
get higher levels of social support from their romantic
partners, right? Um And there's all kinds of good
work showing that, you know, social support and social
connection is related to well being outcomes both in
terms of mental and physical health. Right? I do
agree. I think that there are a lot of
parts of romantic relationships that are replaceable, right? And
so if you're the kind of person who's not
interested in a romantic relationship, you can put together
great social support networks, you can, uh there's all
kinds of things that you can do. I guess
the one thing and, and this isn't database, this
is kind of just more my sense of things
is that the thing about a romantic relationship in
the conventional way that people do it is it's
very convenient one stop shopping for all of those
things, right? Like, um and it is true, you
know, as people get older in particular people's energy
levels go down, their interest in trying out new
relationships or exploring new things kind of goes down
and when you get to more of that stage
of your life where you don't wanna go out
all the time, you don't wanna meet new people
all the time. I do think that romantic relationships
provide enormous benefits. Now, I, I do think there's
a good argument that part of this might be
because we've structured society in a way to make
it easy for people to have romantic relationships. And
let's say we started building apartments that were more
single focused that allowed people like common spaces where
they could go and get some of these needs
met. Maybe there are structural changes we could make,
that would make that easier. But yeah, I do
think that for a lot of people, there are
important benefits that they get out of a romantic
connection. Um And it's just, it's just considerably more
convenient so that particularly as people age, it can
be a very healthy way for people to get
their needs met. But that's contingent on it being
a good relationship. And I think like a lot
of people, I would say that a bad relationship
is worse than being single. Yeah. And also
about that, uh and about being on the rise
and some of those studies, particularly the ones about
sex lessness. Uh I've also talked with Bella Depolo
about this and she agreed with me on this
point, I guess that some of those studies that
sometimes we see on the media, on the internet,
social media and elsewhere where they present uh graphic
with the number of people, people that over the
course of the last year, for example, haven't had
sex at all and uh younger people over the
past few decades, it apparently has gone up the
number of people who have zero sex over the
last year or something like that. Perhaps those studies
are also, or, or perhaps they are, but we
are not given that information, but maybe they're not
detailed enough in terms of, is it the case
that most of those people feel bad about it?
Is it they're that they're just reporting that? But
they don't even feel bad. I mean, I would
imagine that it wouldn't very realistic to think that
most of those people would not feel bad about
being sexless for a year or even more. But
at least perhaps some of them wouldn't care that
much about it.
Yeah, I mean, you know, again, it's an individual
difference and I, you know, I don't know, off
the top of my head. Well enough, like what
are like, average levels of sexual desire among single
people. But, you know, our data definitely indicate that
there would be a substantial number of those people
who are not having sex and are not troubled
by it, you know. Um, BUT there would be
a substantial percentage of people who would be, you
know. So, yeah, I, you know, again, I think
that the, I, I think that the jury is
kind of out in terms of like, is this
a good thing or a bad thing necessarily? Um,
BUT yeah, I think, I think you would get
all kinds of different people there. But yeah, I
can, it is, again, it's, it'll be the single
people who are frustrated by it who are gonna
be the less happy singles? I mean, again though,
I mean, this is, I mean, this is another
point that I often make because I also think
that like psychology can often be a very, we
should be so simplistic. Sometimes we're like positive emotion,
good, negative emotion, bad, but negative emotion is not
necessarily a bad thing. Like it's a good thing
that we feel hungry otherwise we wouldn't be motivated
to go out to eat, right? And sometimes I
think about this when we talk about like people
who are unhappy singles for like, like all kinds
of happy singles and they're stable and they, and
they should, you know, that's the life that you
should be living. But you know, being an unhappy
single, maybe that's what motivates you to do something
to put yourself in a romantic relationship and make
yourself happier, you know.
Yeah, exactly. So let me just ask you two
more questions. These will be the last ones about
perhaps things that I would bet everyone out there
has experienced to some degree or another in their
romantic life. So do people care more, more about
missed romantic opportunities or rejection?
Yeah, I mean, our uh data suggest that at
least when you get people looking back on uh
the kinds of romantic experiences that they've had in
the past that uh over the long term, they
are more troubled by um you know, opportunities that
they might have had and never took, than, than,
you know, shooting their shot and, and getting, uh,
you know, getting shot down. Um, YOU know, I
mean, that's, I think it's one of these, like,
short term, long term things where, like, I bet
you it feels worse in the short term to
get rejected, but in the long term, yeah, our
data suggests that, um, you know, not taking your
shot is something that people regret more.
Yeah. I, I also imagine that at least rejection
allows for, uh, more easily closing off that bet,
let's say, because at least we know for sure
that it wouldn't work.
I think that's, I think that's a good way
to put it. I mean, mind you, you, right.
It's been a while since we did this research.
But, you know, I do remember some people had
stories where, you know, they always wondered if they
had a shot with this person and then they
run into them at the high school reunion and
then the person is like, you know, if you
had just asked me out. So, like, sometimes people
do get a confirmation that they missed their shot
and I think that's pretty uncomfortable too.
It's too late to know. Ok. So my last
question will be then, um, I mean, because people
sometimes worry about this. There's, uh, the period when
we're trying to get into a relationship and then
there's the period where we're already in a committed
relationship. So when people, people are already in a
committed relationship, is it that their partner becomes less
judgmental over their flaws and look past them more
easily because this is something that people actually worry
sometimes a lot about.
Yeah, I mean, I would say, uh, like, I
wouldn't say that there is direct evidence as to
whether people become judgmental or not and I would,
or, or become less judgmental or not. I mean,
part of it is we've been talking about with
a lot of this is um you know, there's
some stable individual differences, right? And I don't know,
I don't know, like which of the big five
personality variables I would wanna tie with being judgmental,
but disagreeableness would probably be one of them, right?
Um And so, you know, I would say like
step one is try to circuit the problem by
selecting people who are like warm and responsive and
thoughtful in the first, in the first place, right?
But I mean, you know, I mean, I mean,
all of us have thoughts about people and so
they'll like come out sometimes and, and all of
us feel judgmental towards people at least sometimes, right?
Um There is a process that I, I, that
that happens when people get into romantic relationships as
people get more committed in, in particular. Um That's
been described as a transformation of motivation that like
what happens when you get committed to somebody is
that now you want this relationship to happen for
the long term, right? And so your motivation changes
in that you start becoming less selfish and you
start becoming more motivated by what kinds of actions
will make it more likely that this relationship will
endure for the long term. And so I think
it that kind of transformation uh of motivation that,
you know, and I think it can work on
both ends of this, right? I think on the
one hand, people who are really committed to keeping
the relationship together are going to not want to
hurt their partner even if um and you know,
this is like a little dark and Freudian and
stuff like that. But like, um but it is
true. I mean, all of us have the potential
to hurt others, right? Like all of us have
the potential for anger and lashing out. And um
you know, to the extent that that's something that
motivates people, the more you recognize that selfish tendency
is gonna hurt your partner and hurt your relationship.
Commitment should take the edge off of that, right?
And so I think one of the things that
will happen there is the person will hopefully be
less judgmental among all kinds of other things because
it's in the way of their own goal of
keeping the relationship together. But I will say the
other thing that that transformation of motivation can do
is it can make it easier for people to
take those negative behaviors from a partner. You know.
So, um, I think one of the reasons people
might get upset about something, I mean, it does
hurt and I certainly am not saying that people
should be judgmental towards their partners. Right. But I
think one of the reasons people get upset about
something like their partner being judgmental towards them is
they're doing some kind of a calculus of, oh,
I think this person doesn't really value me and
that puts this relationship at risk of breaking up.
Right? And let's say you've been together with someone
for 20 years and you just, you know, like,
you just know that this person and you were
going the distance, like that's just not even a
question anymore. You don't read that behavior as much
as, oh, this is a threat to my relationship.
And so I think that we get better at
putting up with our, the things that annoy us
in our partner because we don't have to freak
out about like, oh, this is gonna undermine the
relationship. It can become a little bit more like,
oh, there they go again, doing their judgmental thing.
But like, this will pass just like it does
every other time, you know?
Yeah. Ok. Great. So, Doctor mcdonald, just before we
go, would you like to tell people where they
can find you and your work on the internet?
Yeah. So, um, uh, the lab website is, uh
mcdonald lab dot C A that's C A for
Canada. Uh And we post a bunch of the,
like the media appearances that I've done on there.
Uh There are uh links to all of the
academic papers that we've done on there. If, if
people are interested in learning it at that level.
Uh I also have a Twitter account. I think
my Twitter handle is G mcdonald U of T.
I am not uh a regular tweeter uh but
I will post pretty much every new paper that's
on there and, and other announcements about the Single
Studies Association and stuff like that. So, uh those
are probably the best two places to find me,
right? So I'll be leaving links to that in
the description of the interview when Doctor mcdonald. Thank
you so much again for taking the time to
come on the show. It's been very fun to
talk with you.
Yeah, my pleasure. I appreciate the invitation.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development, then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno,
Bernard Seche O, Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting B
are no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Conners, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in Nai
Z Mar Nevs calling in Hobel, Governor Mikel Stormer
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Hall, her
ma J and La Jung Y and the Samuel
K Hes Mark Smith. Tom Hummel s friends, David
Sloan Wilson, Yaar, Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani
Charlotte, Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt Pavlo Stassi Alek
Me, Gary G Alman Sam of Zaypj Barboza, Julian
Price Edward Hall, Eden Broder Douglas Fry Franca Gilon
Cortez or Scott Zachary ftdw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner,
Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris Williams and
Peter Wo David Williams, the Ausa Anton Erickson Charles
Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry
Dey Junior, Old Ebon Starry Michael Bailey. Then spur
by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake, Zul Barnabas
Radick Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor Luke. Neeson. Chris Tory
Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No week in the
B brand Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man George Katis
Valentine Steinman, Perros, Kate Van Gogh, Alexander Albert Liam
Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular J Ner Urla.
Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson,
Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks to
my producers, these our web, Jim Frank Luca Stina,
Tom Veg and Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller
Thomas Trumble Catherine and Patrick Tobin John Carlman, Negro,
Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to my executive
producers Matthew Lavender, Sergi, Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie.
Thank you for all.